Figure A. NHMUK PV R2095, the holotype dorsal vertebra of Xenoposeidon proneneukos in left lateral view (reversed). A. In the canonical orientation that has been used in illustrations in published papers (Taylor and Naish 2007, Taylor 2018b). B. Rotated 15° “backwards” (i.e. clockwise, with the dorsal portion displaced caudally), yielding a sub-vertical cranial margin in accordance the recommendation of Mannion (2018b). In both parts, the blue line indicates the horizontal axis, the green line indicates the vertical axis, and the red line indicates the slope of the neural arch as in Taylor (2018b: figure 3B, part 2). In part A, the slope (i.e. the angle between the red and green lines) is 35°; in part B, it is 20°.
	Differences in Taylor and Mannion orientations of Xeno vertebra

Figure B. Inconsistent vertebral orientation in our own work (Taylor and Wedel 2013b: figure 2). Representative mid-cervical vertebrae from a turkey (top) and the sauropod Giraffatitan brancai (bottom), not to scale. Each vertebra is shown in left lateral view (on the left) and caudal view (on the right).  Articular surfaces, where each vertebra meets its neighbour, are highlighted in red (for the centra) and blue (for the zygapophyses).  Articular surfaces that are concealed from view are cross-hatched: prezygapophyses face upwards and inwards, so that the facets are inclined towards the midline. In sauropods, the centra have ball-and-socket joints. In birds, the joints are saddle-shaped, and the cranial articular surface is hidden in lateral view. Note that the turkey vertebra is illustrated with the long axis of the centrum horizontal (Method 1) even though this makes the articular surfaces non-vertical; while the Giraffatitan vertebra is illustrated with the caudal articular surface vertical (Method 2) even though this causes the long axis of the centrum to be inclined. Reproduced under the CC By license.
	Example of inconsistency

Figure C. Parrot skeleton with hemisected integument (probably Amazona ochrocephala) in left lateral view (reversed), in the Natuurhistorisch Museum of Rotterdam. Photograph by Marc Vincent, used with permission. Note the very strong 'S'-curve of the neck, such that the most caudal cervical vertebrae are inclined downwards, then more cranial vertebrae are, progressively, inclined upwards, near vertical, sloping backwards, then vertical again, and finally sloping upwards to the skull.
	Life posture differs from "horizontal"

Figure D. Long cervical vertebrae oriented by method 1 (long axis of centrum is horizontal). A. Giraffe Giraffa camelopardalis angolensis FMNH 34426, 3rd cervical vertebra in left lateral view (reversed). B. Domestic turkey Meleagris gallopavo domesticus, 7th cervical vertebra in left lateral view (reversed). C. Giraffatitan brancai lectotype MB.R.2180 (formerly HMN SI), fifth cervical vertebra in right lateral view. All vertebrae are oriented horizontally according to the long axis of the vertebra (red line). The long axis may be defined as the line between the vertical midpoints of the cranial and caudal articular surfaces — but the heights of those midpoints depend on the selection of dorsal and ventral extremities of those surfaces, and these are not always obvious, especially in fossils, which are prone to damage. In part C, the blue lines at each end of the vertebra show candidate margins. At both cranial and caudal surfaces, the dorsal margin is more or less uncontroversial; but there are several candidates for the ventral margin, especially for the caudal articular surface. These are impossible to resolve using only lateral-view photos and potentially even with the complete fossil to hand. The grey outline and shaded area at the caudoventral extremity of the vertebra shows a reconstruction of the undamaged shape of the cotyle, based on Janensch’s (1905: figure 23) drawing — which in turn may have been based on the bone itself in a better state of preservation than currently pertains, or may have been speculative based on the specimen more or less as it is now.
	Long vertebrae oriented by Method 1 (long axis of centrum horizontal)

Figure E. Haplocanthosaurus sp. MWC 8028, caudal vertebra ?3, in cross section, showing medial aspect of left side, cranial to the right, in three orientations. A. In “articular surfaces vertical” orientation (method 2 of this paper). The green line joins the dorsal and ventral margins of the caudal articular surface, and is oriented vertically; the red line joins the dorsal and ventral margins of the cranial articular surface, and is nearly but not exactly vertical, instead inclining slightly forwards. B. In “neural canal horizontal” orientation (method 3 of this paper). The green line joins the cranial and caudal margins of the floor of the neural canal, and is oriented horizontally; the red line joins the cranial and caudal margins of the roof of the neural canal, and is close to horizontal but inclined upwards. C. In “similarity in articulation” orientation (method 4 of this paper). Two copies of the same vertebra, held in the same orientation, are articulated optimally, then the group is rotated until the two are level. The green line connects the uppermost point of the prezygapophyseal rami of the two copies, and is horizontal; but a horizontal line could join the two copies of any point. It happens that for this vertebra methods 3 and 4 (parts B and C of this illustration) give very similar results, but this is accidental.
	Methods 2, 3 and 4 illustrated for the same vertebra

Figure F. Giraffe Giraffa camelopardalis FMNH 34426, two copies of cervical 7 in left lateral view (reversed), articulated, both horizontal according to the “similarity in articulation” orientation (method 4 of this paper). The 7th cervical vertebra of the giraffe is strongly “keystoned”, with the centrum (excluding the articular condyle) forming a parallelogram whose dorsal length is less than its ventral length. The red lines indicate the orientation of the cranial articular surfaces, following the lines of ligament attachment immediately behind the articular condyle; the green line indicates the orientation of the margin of the caudal articular surface. The angle between the red and green lines is about 19 degrees, meaning that if the two copies of the vertebra were oriented such that the cranial and caudal articular surfaces were optimally articulated, there would be a 19 degree angle between the vertebrae.
	Keystoning (cranial and caudal margins not parallel)

Figure G. Proceoelous vertebrae for which it is difficult to determine the orientation of the articular surfaces, scaled to the same vertebral height. A. Komodo dragon Varanus komodoensis, LACM Herpetology specimen 121971, proximal caudal vertebra in right lateral view. Note the extremely convex and strongly inclined caudal articular surface to the left; the cranial articular surface to the right is correspondingly convex and inclined. B. Alligator mississippiensis WRAZL 9840044, seventh cervical vertebra (with cervical rib attached) and sixth cervical vertebra (without rib) in articulation, in right lateral view. Photograph kindly provided by Jess Miller-Camp. While the caudal articular surfaces are strongly convex, the orientation of each can be interpreted as that of the well-defined “collar” that surrounds it.
	Difficulty of determining orientation of convex/concave articulations
	XXX should be discussed before Figure F

Figure H. Haplocanthosaurus sp. MWC 8028, caudal vertebra ?3, in cross section, showing the ambiguous interpretation of the roof of the neural canal. A. The vertebra oriented according to a long interpretation of neural canal extent. The vertical blue line indicates the position identified as the cranialmost extent of the roof of the neural canal (point a), and the red line shows the interpretation of “horizontal” based on that location. B. The same vertebra, but with a different choice of cranialmost extent of the roof of the neural canal (point b), again marked with a vertical blue line. When a line is projected from here to the same caudalmost extent as in part A, the resulting notion of “horizontal” differs by 3.8 degrees.
	Ambiguity in locating trajectory of neural canal ceiling

Figure I. Right halves of two vertebrae from the lumbar (caudal dorsal) region of a human Homo sapiens in sagittal cross-section (cranial to left). Modified from Gray (1858: figure 99). Pale yellow indicates bone in cross-section, grey indicates both bone further from the midline and soft tissue. The red lines mark the floor of the neural canal: since the cranial and caudal ends of the floor of the canal are slightly elevated dorsally relative to the middle part of the canal, it is easy to project a line between these eminences and designate this as the trajectory of the canal. The blue lines mark the roof of the neural canal, but this is convex throughout its length for each vertebra. There is therefore no way to designate any single tangent to it as the trajectory of the neural canal roof of the vertebra as a whole.
	Ambiguity in locating trajectory of neural canal ceiling
	XXX could be merged with Figure H

Figure J. The steps of the similarity-in-articulation method of determining horizontal orientation of a vertebra, illustrated using Haplocanthosaurus sp. MWC 8028, caudal vertebra ?3. A. Two identical copies of the same vertebra depicted in the same orientation. B. The two copies brought into the best whole-vertebra articulation that can be achieved without rotating either. C. The articulated pair rotated together into that orientation in which they are at the same height. This is orientation is designated as horizontal according to the present method.
	How to do Method 4

Figure K. Five instances of Haplocanthosaurus sp. MWC 8028, caudal vertebra ?3, all oriented according to candidate method 2. Since the orientation of the neural canal in this vertebra is inclined 20–30 degrees to perpendicular with the articular surfaces, the result is a kinked spinal cord — something that never happens in life.
	Jaggedness of spinal cord when method 2 is used

Figure L. Sagittally bisected head and cranial neck of a horse in left medial view (reversed). The first four cervical vertebrae are complete, but only the cranial part of the fifth is present. Note that the neural canal runs in a nearly straight line, and is not kinked.
	Smoothness of spinal cord in hemisected horse
	XXX could be merged with Figure K

Figure M. A selection of vertebrae with the approximate trajectory of their neural canals determined by the simple method of pushing a rolled-up piece of paper through their neural canals. A. Brachiosaurus altithorax holotype FMNH P 25107, first and partial second caudal vertebrae in right lateral view. B. Camarasaurus sp. CM 584, proximal caudal vertebra ?4 in right lateral view. C. Camarasaurus sp. CM 584, mid-caudal vertebra ?12 in left lateral view (reversed). D. Juvenile giraffe Giraffa camelopardalis, cervical vertebra 6 in left lateral view (reversed). E. Juvenile giraffe Giraffa camelopardalis, cervical vertebra 7 in left lateral view (reversed). Note the much stronger inclination than in C6. F. Ostrich Struthio camelus, cervical vertebra 16 in left lateral view (reversed).
	Examples of neural canalinator

Figure N. 3D print of the Xenoposeidon proneneukos holotype dorsal vertebra NHMUK PV R2095, oriented horizontally according to method 3 (neural canal is horizontal) by the toothpicks method. From left to right: left caudolateral (reversed), left lateral (reversed) and left craniolateral (reversed) views. The camera is at the same level as the floor of the neural canal, so that the toothpicks appear horizontal in the oblique views as well as in the lateral view. This procedure was carried out using a 3D print of the vertebra from the scan data published as the supplementary file to Taylor (2018b), as the fossil itself was not readily available.
	The toothpick method

Figure O. Varying apparent cross-sectional area of the neural canal of Haplocanthosaurus sp. MWC 8028, caudal vertebra ?3, depending on the orientation of a vertebra. A and C. Right lateral view in different orientations. B and D. Cranial views in different orientations. Parts A and B depict the vertebra oriented according to method 2 (Articular surfaces of centrum are vertical), and show a neural canal that is relatively small (5870 pixels) in cross-sectional area; parts C and D depict the vertebra oriented according to method 3 (Neural canal is horizontal), and show a neural canal that is 61% larger (9458 pixels) in cross-sectional area.
	Variation in apparent neural canal CSA

